This is a bit of a weird catch-all section
that I've created at the end of this for
what happens after the prototyping stage,
right, once you've done the design.
Basically, I outlined those stages,
didn't I?
Discovery phase, prototyping,
build, and live, right?
Basically, most of the heavy
lifting in the design for
the designer happens in the discovery
phase in the prototyping.
Once it gets into build and
live, our role changes, right?
But that doesn't mean it goes away.
And actually, there's important work
that needs to be done in the build and
the go live, where it's really
important to get it right.
Because if we don't get it right,
the website A won't look like what we
agreed it would look like with
the clients, which can cause problems,
and B will underperform.
And C probably never
reach its full potential,
because a website never reaches its full
potential on the day it goes live, right?
There will always be
things that can improve.
So it's that kinda stuff that I
wanna get to in this final session.
So let's start off by talking
about working with developers.
Now, by far, the majority of you that are
listening to this are either developers or
do the development and the design.
So you working by yourself
makes life a lot easier.
But I think it is really important
to stress the working relationship
between a designer and
a developer is incredibly important.
And yet these days with
the way the industry's gone,
it's becoming increasingly
abstract from one another.
So too often, it's less of a problem in
an agency and freelancer environment.
Because either the Jack of all trades that
are doing both development and design,
or, alternatively, they're in relatively
small teams where the designer and
the developer sit side by side.
But in larger organizations, it's like
they live in two separate worlds often.
I don't know what it's like with you guys.
But typically, the developers don't
even report into the same department as
the designers sometimes.
And there's not necessarily a lot of
interaction going between the two.
But I would say that the fundamental
link there between the designer and
the developer is probably,
it's a three way.
That could have been worded better,
couldn't it?
It's the relationship between the designer
and the content specialist and
the designer and the developer,
are the key relationships in this.
And so ideally,
you wanna be sitting beside
the developer as you do the design, right?
I know that doesn't always happen.
So the next best thing is you've
gotta involve that developer a lot.
Show them sketches, show them wireframes,
show them everything as you go along.
Involve them in the conversation,
because they will have all
kinds of feedback that they can
give on things like performance,
on things like security,
on things like interactivity.
Increasingly these days,
I'm going to developers and
coming up with some idea about
animation or interactivity, and
developers are looking at me going,
well, that's a bit 2000.
[LAUGH] These days, we can do this,
and it's amazing and wonderful.
So that kind of relationship
is really important.
I've overwrite the point,
but there you go.
I will also repeat what I said earlier,
don't forget to design with
the developer in mind.
So create components that
the developer can reuse.
So when you're working in Figma and
you're doing navigation and headers and
footers and cards and things like that.
Don't just build them individually on each
page, but use the component function, so
that a developer can easily see
that that's a reusable component,
it's reused over multiple pages.
Design using the auto-layout
function I mentioned in Figma.
It very closely replicates
the CSS box model,
which makes life a lot easier,
again, for developers.
Make use of the color and
typography styles to ensure
consistency across your designs.
Create all those states, think about
button states, linked states, form states,
all of these things you need to
get into with the developer.
And error messaging is another
really big one to get into
when you're working with developers.
And then when it comes to breakpoints,
consider your responsive breakpoints.
We've fallen into this bad habit,
I think, at the moment,
when it comes to responsive design,
where it seems to be the standard rule,
you do a desktop version and
you do a mobile version.
Maybe if you got loads of time and money,
you do a tablet version in between.
But those are completely arbitrary things,
right?
There is no mobile size.
There is no desktop size.
So I would encourage you instead of
thinking in terms of just mobile and
desktop, actually design your breakpoints
around the content, not the device.
So that as you're creating your design,
again, with Figma and things,
you can actually make
your design responsive.
So the only points where
you need a breakpoint and
a separate version is where
the design kind of falls apart,
because the line lights are too small or
whatever.
So I just break it wherever is the natural
place to break rather than at any
particular device.
And also, make sure your developers are
comfortable with these design tools and
understand all of their capabilities.
I was working with a developer recently,
and I just made a throwaway comment.
And of course,
this is the inspect view for you in Figma.
And he was like, [SOUND] I blew his mind,
cuz he just hadn't used Figma before,
which why should he, he's a developer.
And yet, it will give you loads
of information, loads of CSS.
I'm not saying you use
exactly the CSS in there,
but it's quick access to all the
information that you need as a developer.
So yeah, just build and
nurture that relationship.
Use tools that help each other and
support each other, and
don't think,
that's the developer's problem.
I'm speaking to the converted here,
but it's worth saying.
If for no other reason,
you can just edit this bit out and
send it to your designers.
The other thing I would say when it
comes to that working relationship and
when you get into the build,
is to be flexible.
I come across a lot of designers,
especially designers that came
originally from a print background, that
are obsessed with perfect pixel design,
which is just not very feasible online.
But in particular, I think even with more
educated designers, they often make some
bad decisions that if there had been
a proper conversation with the developer,
could have been avoided,
especially around the area of performance.
So I see a lot of designers,
they get carried away with
their use of fonts, right?
Fonts are a big drain on performance.
They get pretty big, unless you're using
variable fonts where, which by the way,
if you haven't checked out variable fonts
as a designer, you really should do.
Really, you wanna be avoiding
using any more than two fonts.
And you wanna limit the number of font
variations, weights that you use,
because it all build up and
really starts having a hit on performance.
While I'm going through these,
I'm really interested,
cuz I know there are developers in
the room and there's developers on chat.
So if there are any other messages
you could send to designers,
I'd love to hear it in the chat, right?
What other things do they need to know?
So fonts is one thing that I often.
Images is another when
it comes to performance.
Designers love to add imagery
that has no value, right?
It's purely decorative, right?
The page is looking a bit boring.
Let's put in a stock photograph
of two people shaking hands.
It's like, why?
It's like using bandwidth for no reason,
and provides no value whatsoever.
So we need to kind of avoid that thing.
And understand images better, I think
a lot of designers are really poor in
understanding the medium in
which they operate on the Web.
So the fact that some images compress
better than others, that kind of thing.
As designers, I think we've got
a responsibility to understand that
kind of thing and not just go [LAUGH].
I think there's this thing that
performance is developers' problem.
But if you give them a design which
has got massive hero images and
video backgrounds and fonts and
all of this kind of stuff,
they can't perform miracles.
And JavaScript is the final thing.
I mean, there's nothing wrong with
JavaScript, don't get me wrong,
don't hate me.
But as you add interactive elements into a
design and add design delighters, so nice
animations and that kind of thing, really,
really good, but they can cause problems.
JavaScript, in my experience, can cause
problems, especially on mobile devices,
less powerful devices,
they don't always run very well.
So if you're gonna use JavaScript,
use it, in my opinion, at least,
to progressively enhance the design
rather than as a requirement.
But I know that that proves
somewhat controversial.
So has anybody got any kind
of other things designer,
developer conflict points?
Has anybody posted anything into chat?
>> No, one person said, I thought
the design process started in Figma.
I'm glad I saw this workshop
early in my programming career.
>> Yeah.
>> See you.
>> It needs to end in Figma.
Well, no, even Figma is only in the middle
part of it, because I would ask you,
after you finish in Figma, you're
then moving into the browser, right?
In fact, as somebody who is very old and
old school in this,
I will actually sometimes just skip Figma
entirely and code it in the browser.
This gets into the, should designers
know how to code debate, right?
I believe fundamentally that any designer,
any artist,
whatever, needs to understand
the medium in which they operate.
And that doesn't mean they're ever gonna
code like a developer can code, and
neither should they, they shouldn't
be doing production-ready code.
But you do need to understand
the fundamentals of the medium that you
work in.
And I think that's why I actually
quite like designing in the browser,
because I know it works then.
I know that that is how
the browser behaves.
And although Figma and Sketch and
these kinds of tools are making leaps and
bounds in terms of replicating
the browser-based experience,
they're still not quite there,
it's not quite the same.
So there is something to be
said from actually, yeah, okay,
do Figma to a certain degree,
but then take it on and
go on to then refine that in the browser
and take it to the next level.
So don't see your Figma
files as written in stone.
They are just a step
on the design journey.
Right, Let's talk about
one area in particular,
which is called design delighters,
cuz this is a tricky one, right?
So first of all, let me define
what I mean by design delighter,
right, cuz it's a bit of a made up term.
A design delighter is an interactive or
visual element that although not necessary
for the site, enhances
the experience in some way, right?
So a design delighter
might be an animation or
something along those lines, kind of, yes,
you could configure your product
through a form with a drop-down menu.
But it would be much better if it
was an interactive wizard that
you kind of played with.
So there are things like this.
Now, these are really useful components,
and
there are all kinds of examples of them.
So accordions, animation, carousels,
interactive guides, wizards,
and configuration tools,
all of these,
I would define as design delighters.
And a design delighter is
not strictly necessary, but
it makes a big difference to a website.
And so the way that I tend to approach
those as I do design and as I work on
design projects is to think of those,
I set aside a certain amount of time and
a certain amount of budget to do
specifically those things, right?
So I design the experience as if it's
not reliant on those things, and
then we add those as an extra layer
on top, progressively enhance or
improve the application
using these kinds of things.
And the reason that I take that
approach is because I think
creating design delighters works best
when it's done very much in close
collaboration with the developer.
A developer is gonna have a much
better idea as what is possible and
what will fit within the budget, okay?
So the design delighters I tend to
leave until I'm in the build phase,
so that I can do those in close
relationship with the developer.
So there's a whole load
of stuff about working
with developers in the build stage.
But there is one final message that
I did briefly mention before, but
I'm now gonna say in very big
letters on a bright background.
Which is,
never ever show a design to a client or
a stakeholder that you have not first
shown to your developer, right?
I see people make this
mistake all the time and
you get yourself caught in a trap, right?
You present and
sell an idea to stakeholders and
clients that can't be built, right?
That isn't gonna fit in the budget,
isn't fitting in the timescales.
Show it to your developer first,
make sure that they get a chance to go,
you really wanna do that?
If we do that, we're gonna have to change
our architecture or whatever it involves.
Those conversations need to happen and
are really important.
And while I'm on ranting, right,
one more thing just to throw into the mix,
let go of pixel perfect control of design.
That's another thing that too many
designers seem to be hung up on,
and it just isn't relevant.
A developer isn't gonna be able to
reproduce your design exactly as you
envisaged it.
The web doesn't work like that,
get over it.
So basically what I'm saying is
this is a collaboration, right?
The final design is a collaboration
between the developer and the design and
the content person and
various other people as well.
But you don't own the design, right?
And I think it's important
to recognize that.
The final design is really a collaboration
between design and development.
And that's great.
If you're someone that does both
the design and the development,
that puts you in a uniquely good position,
I believe,
to produce an outstanding experience,
cuz you understand the whole picture.
Now, obviously, it's hard to be both
an expert in design and development,
and I don't think you will be.
But there is an advantage in being a
generalist as well, so don't regret that.
And that means that you need to involve
the developer early in the process.
And you need to be, as the designer,
available to collaborate with
the developer during the build.
You can't just disappear
on to other things.